RFC-3: more dimensions for thee (#239)
ome/ngff: rfc/3/index.md

| Doug Shepherd | [dpshepherd](https://github.com/dpshepherd) | Arizona State University | 2024-05-22 | [Endorse](https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/239#issue-2308436425) | -->
| John Bogovic | [bogovicj](https://github.com/bogovicj) | HHMI Janelia Research Campus | 2024-05-22 | [Endorse](https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/239#issue-2308436425) | -->
| Eric Perlman | [perlman](https://github.com/perlman) |  | 2024-05-22 | [Endorse](https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/239#issue-2308436425) | -->
| Lachlan Deakin | [LDeakin](https://github.com/LDeakin) | Australian National University | 2024-05-22 | [Endorse](https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/239#issue-2308436425) | -->

## Overview

OME-NGFF version 0.4 places severe restrictions on the number, names, and types
of axes that are allowed in the axes metadata. This has had the effect of
limiting the datasets in proprietary formats that *can* be meaningfully
converted to NGFF. It has also prevented some novel datasets from being written
in NGFF format. This RFC only removes restrictions from the specification. An
important consequence is that all valid NGFF datasets would remain valid after

> this change.

Reviewer: I had this formatted as a suggestion but the formatting got in the way. I think it might help to put some text in there like this: 

"These restrictions hinder converting some datasets in proprietary formats to NGFF. The axis restrictions have also prevented some novel datasets from being written in the NGFF format. Clearly the data model articulated in version 0.4 of OME-NGFF is not inclusive enough for these datasets. So this RFC proposes removing these axis restrictions, thereby making OME-NGFF more open to the diversity of bioimaging datasets.  Because this RFC only removes restrictions from the specification, all valid NGFF datasets remain valid after this change."

basically, the 2-5D restriction is a barrier to researchers who have data that doesn't fit into that model. so we remove the restriction, and make the ome-ngff model more expressive, so that those researchers can use the format.

> ## Background

Reviewer: I think it's important to mention here that as a historical fact OME-NGFF is an OME project, and the OME data model is 5D. This I think goes a long way to explaining the intertia for the 5D limit and the other various axis restrictions.

Author: I don't think I need to really get into it. I'm happy to change "unfortunately, 0.4 imposes restrictions..." to "unfortunately, **for historical reasons**, 0.4 imposes restrictions...".

Reviewer: I don't think the word "unfortunate" fits here -- it's just an explanatory fact that this format was jump-started by OME, and they use a 5D model. This is literally the background for the 5D limit, so it might be helpful to put that here for people who don't know the history.

establishment of a community-agreed standardized data format", but,
unfortunately, [version 0.4 of the NGFF specification][ngff 0.4] [imposes][ngff
0.4 multiscales metadata] severe restrictions on the applications:

> The length of "axes" must be between 2 and 5 and MUST be equal to the
> dimensionality of the zarr arrays storing the image data (see
> "datasets:path"). The "axes" MUST contain 2 or 3 entries of "type:space" and
> MAY contain one additional entry of "type:time" and MAY contain one additional
> entry of "type:channel" or a null / custom type. The order of the entries MUST
> correspond to the order of dimensions of the zarr arrays. In addition, the
> entries MUST be ordered by "type" where the "time" axis must come first (if
> present), followed by the  "channel" or custom axis (if present) and the axes
> of type "space". If there are three spatial axes where two correspond to the
> image plane ("yx") and images are stacked along the other (anisotropic) axis
> ("z"), the spatial axes SHOULD be ordered as "zyx".

And:

> Each "datasets" dictionary MUST have the same number of dimensions and MUST
> NOT have more than 5 dimensions.

> These restrictions are actively preventing users from converting existing
> datasets to NGFF. For example, Zeiss .czi datasets [may contain][czi format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These restrictions are a barrier preventing users from converting existing
datasets to NGFF. For example, Zeiss .czi datasets [may contain][czi format
```

  - ... Your name here?
* Consulted:
  - ...
* Socialization:
  - image.sc: https://forum.image.sc/t/ome-ngff-update-postponing-transforms-previously-v0-5/95617/2

## Implementation

A draft implementation is [already in progress][implementation].

## Backwards Compatibility

Since this proposal only removes restrictions, these changes are backwards
compatible at the file level: v0.4 files would transparently be v0.5 files if
this proposal is approved.

Any readers or writers that proactively checked the dimension restrictions
(number of dimensions, dimension names, dimension types) would need to remove
those checks. However, this should be a small amount of work in most cases.

## Forward Compatibility

A draft proposal for [coordinate transformations][trafo spec] already includes
most of the changes proposed here, so we envision that this RFC is compatible
with future plans for the format. The proposal does currently limit the number
of dimensions of type "space" to at most 3, but that limit [could be
removed][space dims comment]. If this RFC is approved, the transformation
specification would need to be updated to reflect this. However, that is an easy

> change and there seems to be sufficient support in the community for this idea.

Reviewer: Do we need to talk about that (stalled) PR at all? I don't see why it's relevant here

Author: It's relevant because it speaks to the forward compatibility of this RFC — ie it is in line with existing proposals for the format. That the PR is stalled is not really relevant — it's stalled because of minor details (e.g. array order) that don't have a bearing on this PR. Based on the discussion, other aspects, and certainly the ones relevant to this RFC, have quite broad consensus.

Reviewer: in that case isn't it sufficient to just state that there are no known conflicts with other active proposals?

## Drawbacks, risks, alternatives, and unknowns

The main reason specifications make restrictions on a file format is to limit
the space of possible implementations. This reduces the overall complexity of
supporting a file format and the burden on implementations.

One particular concern that has been voiced in the past is that in general,
software dealing with these images knows what to do with axes called x, y, and
z, but might not know what to do with axes called foo, bar, and baz. However,
this concern is fully and properly addressed by the existence of the "type" key
in the "axes" metadata, and the special type called "space".

<!-- Empty section templates; can be deleted on merge. -->
<!-- ## Abandoned Ideas (Optional Header) -->
<!-- ## Future possibilities (Optional Header) -->

## Performance

This proposal has no performance implications.

## Testing

As part of the [proposed implementation][implementation], Davis Bennett has
created pydantic models that validate the proposed schema. These are actually
new additions to the NGFF specification, surfaced pre-existing errors in the

> schema, and should prevent new errors from appearing.

Reviewer: I don't think we need this text. Those pydantic models are merely a convenient way to write JSON schema. They don't express anything that's not already written in the prose of the spec. Also, I am planning on removing those models from the PR, because they add an undocumented build step that I don't have the energy to document.

Reviewer: as of https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/235/commits/aa5c9532d1155bf3040d7bdf951ae63fab8aa560 those models are gone

Author: @d-v-b I really loved the models! 😭

Reviewer: they will live here https://github.com/janeliascicomp/pydantic-ome-ngff if 0.5 comes out

section describes six dataset types that are currently impossible to represent
in OME-Zarr:

- in [electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD)][ebsd], a microscopy technique
  common in materials science, a beam of electrons is scanned over a surface,
  and for each (2D) position in the scan, a full 2D diffraction pattern is
  recorded, resulting in a 4-dimensional data array.
- from the diffraction patterns, it is possible to obtain an *orientation map*,
  containing a 3D angle at each 2D position of the material.
- the same principles apply to [diffusion tensor imaging][dti], where a
  three-dimensional diffusion tensor is measured at each voxel.
- it is common to compute Fourier transforms of 3D images. The datasets have
  three dimensions but they are measured in *frequency*, not space.
- when computing segmentations, one may use finer or coarser priors, resulting
  in overlapping, equally valid segmentations, for example, of organelles at
  one level, cells at another, and tissues at yet another. One common way to
  store such a segmentation is to add a dimension for "coarseness".
- computed spaces may have arbitrary dimensions related to the computation. For

>   example, in subtomogram averaging of [cryo electron tomography][CryoET],

Reviewer 2: Where did you want CryoET to point, @jni?

Author: Oops, fixed! 😅
